PSYC100 GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY

TREATMENTS AND THERAPIES

Learning Outcomes

 Biological treatments
 Psychodynamic therapies
 Humanistic therapies
 Cognitive therapies
 Behavioural therapies

Major Approaches to Treatment

Other examples: EMDR, ACT, Schema, DBT, Gestalt, Existential, Attachment-based, couples therapy,
sex therapy, family therapy etc.

I - Biological Approaches
 Drug Therapies:
 Most commonly used biological interventions
 Psychopharmacology: the study of how drugs affect

cognitions, emotions, and behavior
 Three major categories:
 Antipsychotic drugs
 Antianxiety drugs
 Antidepressant drugs

A) Drug Therapies

 Antipsychotic Drugs:
Decrease action of dopamine
Reduce positive symptoms of schizophrenia (e.g.

delusions and hallucinations)
Little effect on negative symptoms

Drug Therapies

 Antianxiety Drugs:
Designed to reduce anxiety without affecting alertness or

concentration
Side effects: drowsiness, lethargy, concentration

difficulties, dependence

Drug Therapies
 Antidepressant Drugs:
Four classes:
1.

Tricyclics

2.

Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors

3.

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)

4.

Seratonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)

Drug Therapies
 Antidepressant Drugs (continued):
Tricyclics and MAO inhibitors:
Increase activity of norepinephrine and serotonin
MAOs more severe side effects

Drug Therapies
Antidepressant Drugs (continued):
SSRIs:
Increase activity of serotonin
Milder side effects than other antidepressants
Reduce depressive symptoms more rapidly

SNRIs:
Increase Serotonin and NE

Drug Therapies
 Criticisms of Drug Treatments:
As much as 90% of effects may be placebo effects
Do not “cure” the disorder
Do not teach client coping and problem solving skills to

deal with life problems
High relapse rate

B) Electroconvulsive Therapy
Patient is given a sedative and a muscle relaxant
Patient is placed on padded mattress, where

electrodes are attached to scalp
Brief shock (less than one second) is applied,

causing a seizure of the CNS
Short-term effects: headache, sore muscles,

confusion

Electroconvulsive Therapy
 Useful in treating severe depression, particularly if

there is a high risk of suicide
Effects can be immediate
No one knows why it works
Used primarily in patients with major depression who

cannot take or do not respond to medication

Electroconvulsive Therapy
 Criticisms of ECT:
Possibility of relapse is high
Possibility of permanent memory loss
Possibility of permanent brain damage

C) Psychosurgery
 Psychosurgery: surgical procedures that remove or

destroy brain tissue in an attempt to change
disordered behavior
Used rarely, as a last resort

II - Psychodynamic Therapies
 Focus on internal conflicts and unconscious factors

that underlie maladaptive behavior
 Goal is to help clients achieve insight
Insight: the conscious awareness of the

psychodynamics that underlie their problems

Psychodynamic Techniques
Free Association: clients verbally report without

censorship any thoughts, feelings, or images that enter their
awareness
Provides clues about important themes and issues
Dream Interpretation: dreams express unconscious

dreams, fantasies, and wishes
Analyst helps client interpret the symbolism in the dream

III - Humanistic Psychotherapies
 Humanists view people as capable of consciously

controlling their actions

People should take responsibility for their own choices

and behavior
Everyone possesses inner resources for self-healing
and personal growth
Focus is primarily on the present and future instead of
the past

Humanistic Psychotherapies
 Person-Centered Therapy/Client-Centered Therapy (Carl Rogers) :

three important therapist attributes:
 Unconditional Positive Regard: communicated when the therapist shows

that he or she genuinely cares about and accepts the client, without
judgment or evaluation
 Empathy: willingness and ability to view the world through the client’s eyes
 Genuineness: consistency between the way the therapist feels and the

way he or she behaves

IV - Cognitive Therapies
 Focus on the role of irrational and self-defeating

thought patterns
Therapists try to help clients discover and change the

cognitions that underlie their problems
Thought patterns are not unconscious, but they can be

automatic and ingrained

Cognitive Therapies
 A - Rational-Emotive Behavioural Therapy (Albert

Ellis): ABCD Model

 A: the activating event that seems to trigger the emotion
 B: the belief system that underlies the way in which a

person appraises the event
 C: the emotional and behavioral consequences of that
appraisal
 D: disputing (challenging) erroneous belief systems

Cognitive Therapies
 B - Cognitive Therapy (Aaron Beck): goal is to identify

faulty/negative automatic thoughts and to help clients
change these thought patterns
 For example, “I am worthless and cannot do anything right” thought in depression.
 The “Negative Triad”

Help clients realize that their thoughts, and not the

situation, cause their maladaptive emotional reactions

Cognitive Therapies
 C – Cognitive Behavioural Therapy: CBT is a widely used, evidence-based form of talk therapy that
helps people manage problems by changing the way they think (cognitions) and behave.

 It is based on the concept that our thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are interconnected. Negative or distorted thought patterns

can lead to emotional distress and unhelpful behaviors, creating a vicious cycle.

 CBT focuses on identifying and challenging these unhelpful thoughts, replacing them with more balanced and realistic ones,

while also encouraging healthier behavioral changes.

 Uses the ABC model

E.g. Someone with social anxiety is invited to a work party.


A (Activating Event): You arrive at the party and notice a group of colleagues talking, but no one immediately approaches
you to chat.



B (Belief): "They think I'm boring and awkward. Everyone here dislikes me, and I'll never fit in. This proves I'm unlikeable."



C (Consequence): Emotional: Intense anxiety, embarrassment, or shame. & Behavioral: You leave the party early, avoid
eye contact, or stand alone in a corner.

V - Behavior Therapies
 Behavioral approaches believe that:
Maladaptive behaviors are not merely symptoms of

underlying problems
The behaviors are the problem
Problem behaviors are learned in the same ways
normal behaviors are
Maladaptive behaviors can be unlearned by applying
classical conditioning, operant conditioning, and
modeling principles

Behavior Therapies
 A - Exposure Therapy
 Treat phobias through exposure to the feared stimulus
 Highly effective for reducing anxiety responses
 Systematic desensitization and Flooding

Behavior Therapies
 B - Aversion Therapy: the therapist pairs a stimulus

that is attractive to the client with a noxious stimulus
in an attempt to condition an aversion to the stimulus
 Examples: alcohol, pedophiles
 More effective if paired with a comprehensive treatment

program

Behavior Therapies

Malcolm McDowell in a scene from A
Clockwork Orange. His eyes are clamped
open, forcing him to watch a film
portraying acts of violence and sadism, as
part of aversion therapy. He’d earlier been
given an emetic drug, so that extreme
nausea and violence will become
associated.

Behavior Therapies
 C - Token Economy
System for strengthening desired behaviors through the

systematic application of positive reinforcement
Tokens are given for desirable behaviors; they can

then be exchanged for tangible reinforcers
Very effective in a wide variety of situations

Lecture summary

 What are biological treatments (e.g. drug treatment)?

Psychodynamic therapies? Humanistic therapies? Cognitive
therapies? Behavioural therapies?

