PSYC100 GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY
SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY

Learning Outcomes
I.

Attributions
I.
II.
III.
IV.

Naïve scientist theory
Correspondence inference theory
Covariation theory
Errors and biases

II. Conformity and Group Influence
I.
II.
III.
IV.

Internalization vs Compliance
Sheriff’s Study
Asch’s Study
Informational vs Normative social influence

III. Obedience
I. Milgram’s experiment
II. Puppy and nurse studies
III. Zimbardo’s experiment

WHAT IS AN ATTRIBUTION?

How people explain the causes of behaviour (of
others and own)
Two main types:

o Internal (dispositional)
o External (situational)

INTERNAL VS. EXTERNAL

• Internal attribution – where behaviour is
explained as due to something inside the person
e.g. intelligence, personality
• External attribution – where behaviour is
explained as due to something outside the
person
e.g. Luck, task difficulty

THREE CLASSIC THEORIES

I.

Heider (1958) – The Naïve Scientist

II.

Jones & Davis (1965) – Correspondence
Inference Theory

III. Kelley (1967, 1973) – Covariation Theory

I - HEIDER NAIVE SCIENTIST THEORY
Heider & Simmel (1944) hypothesised that:

•People perceive behaviour as being caused
•People give causal attributions even to inanimate
objects.
•Heider (1958) asserted people were naïve/lay scientists
who used rational processes to explain events.

HEIDER AND SIMMEL (1944)
College students were asked to describe and interpret the motion of three geometrical figures
(abstract) moving in and out of a rectangle, a section of which opened and closed like a door.
https://vimeo.com/36847727

Figures were perceived and systematically interpreted by the participants as persons with
particular personality traits and expressing particular needs and dispositions (e.g. aggression,
escape to safety, or rescue).

II - CORRESPONDENCE INFERENCE THEORY
(JONES & DAVIS, 1965)

We use information about another person’s
behaviour and its effects to draw a correspondent
inference, in which the behaviour is attributed to a
disposition or personality characteristic.
How do we do this?

CORRESPONDENCE INFERENCE THEORY

Were the effects of someone’s behaviour intended? We are more
likely to draw a correspondent inference if the behaviour appears
intentional than when it is unintentional.
Intention is important: Individual must know the consequences of their
action and have the ability to carry out the action
Were the effects of the behaviour socially desirable? We are more
likely to decide there is a correspondence when the effects of the
behaviour are socially undesirable.
For example, if someone is very rude in a social situation, we conclude
that he/she is an unpleasant person.

III - COVARIATION THEORY (KELLEY, 1967; 1973)

Where we have a number of examples of a person’s behaviour, we
make judgments of covariation to decide how to attribute cause.
Consensus in respect of other people behaving in the same way in
response to the stimulus – how do other people respond to this
stimulus?
Distinctiveness of the stimulus in evoking the behaviour – does
the behaviour generalize to other situations?
Consistency of the behaviour in the presence of this stimulus – Is
the person’s response consistent across time?

CONSENSUS
• The generality of behaviours across others
• Do other people behave in the same way (i.e. like this
person) in response to the stimulus (i.e. in similar
situations) ?
 High consensus is when other people act like the
person in question
 Low consensus is when people act differently than
the person in question

DISTINCTIVENESS
• The generality of behaviour across other situations (entities or
tasks)
• How does the person act in similar situations ?
 High distinctiveness is when the behaviour is ‘unique’ to this
situation – the individual never behaves this way in other
situations
 Low distinctiveness is when the behaviour is ‘typical’ of these
situations – the individual behaves this way in most other
situations.

CONSISTENCY
• The generality of behaviour across time
• How has the person responded previously to the situation? Is the person’s response consistent across time?
 High consistency when the individual always behaves this
way in this situation – when the behaviour has been seen
before
 Low consistency is when this is a new behaviour – the
individual never behaves this way in this situation

EXAMPLE OF COVARIATION JUDGEMENT

‘Sarah fails her PSYC100 exam’

• Distinctiveness:

hi = failed only this exam; low = failed other exams.

• Consistency:

hi = failed exams before; low = rarely failed exams before.

• Consensus:

hi = other students failed this exam; low = few other students failed this
exam.

ATTRIBUTION BIAS AND ERRORS

Fundamental Attribution Error
False Consensus Effect
Self-Serving Bias
Actor-Observer Effect

THE FUNDAMENTAL ATTRIBUTION ERROR
(ROSS, 1977)

The tendency for people to over-emphasize dispositional, or
personality-based, explanations for behaviours observed in others
while under-emphasizing the role and power of situational influences
on the same behaviour.
In other words, people tend to have a default assumption that what a
person does is based more on what "kind" of person he is, rather
than the social and environmental forces at work on that person.

The Quiz Game Study
Ross, Amabile & Steinmetz
(1977)

Three groups of participants:
Questioners
Contestants
Observers

Questioners

Composed 10
difficult questions
to ask contestants

Contestants

Answered the
questions

Observers

Watched the
interaction

Participants played their role
 asking questions
 answering questions
 observing interaction
Participants then rated the
general knowledge of
questioner and contestant (0100).

Results:
• Contestants and observers rated questioner significantly more
knowledgeable than contestants.
• Behavior attributed to dispositional qualities, NOT to participants’ role in
study; Overestimating dispositional factors and Underestimating
situational factors
Role of Rater

Contestant
Observer
Questioner

Rating of Questioner

Rating of Contestant

67
83
54

41
49
51

JONES & HARRIS (1967) ‘CASTRO STUDY’

Subjects listened to pro- and anti-Fidel Castro speeches and asked to rate the
pro-Castro attitudes of both.
When the subjects believed that the speech makers freely chose which position to
take (for or against Castro), they naturally rated the people who gave the proCastro speeches as having a more positive attitude toward Castro.
When the subjects were specifically told that the speech makers gave either a
pro- or an anti-Castro speech solely as the result of a coin flip, the subjects still
rated the people who gave the pro-Castro speeches as having, on average, a
more positive attitude towards Castro than those giving anti-Castro speeches.

JONES & HARRIS (1967) ‘CASTRO STUDY’

Thus, even when subjects were aware that the speeches
made were solely because of the flip of a coin, they
committed the fundamental attribution error when it
came to judging the motivation behind pro or anti-Castro
attitudes of the speech makers.

FALSE CONSENSUS EFFECT (ROSS ET AL. 1977)

 Tendency to see own behaviour as more typical than it actually
is (tendency to overestimate the degree to which others agree
with them).
 Commonly present in a group setting where one thinks the
collective opinion of their own group matches that of the larger
population.

ROSS, GREENE & HOUSE (1977)

 Participants asked if they would wear a sign around campus and
watch reactions of others
 Told did not have to do it
 After participants made choice, they rated how many other
students made the same choice as them.

Results:
50% said they would wear a sign
50% said they would not
Estimate
Wear sign
63% would
37% wouldn’t
Not wear sign
23% would
77% wouldn’t
Overestimated how many others would behave as they did!

SELF-SERVING BIAS (MILLER & ROSS, 1975)

 This is our tendency to take credit for success (self-enhancing
bias) and deny any responsibility for failure (self-protective
bias).
e.g. “I got 90 for my essay!” vs. “The lecturer gave me 40!”
 We want to protect / enhance self-esteem
We make dispositional (internal) attributions for our successes
and situational (external) attribution for our failures.

THE ACTOR-OBSERVER EFFECT (JONES & NISBETT,
1972)

Although we tend to attribute others' behaviour to personal or
dispositional factors, we typically attribute our own behaviour to
situational factors.
E.g. you didn't do well on your presentation = you "know" it was
because you had three other projects due in the same week, your
computer crashed on you twice etc.
Someone else gives a bad presentation = that person does not
know his subject well, perhaps lacks intelligence or is terrible at
public speaking.

THE ACTOR-OBSERVER EFFECT
The term specifically refers to a difference in the way people
explain their own behaviour (when they are in the "actor" role) in
contrast to the way they explain other people's behaviour (when
they are in the "observer" role).
Actors attribute their actions to the demands of the situation. 'I
couldn't help it; I was forced by events‘ etc.
Observers tend to attribute the actions of the actor to internal,
stable, personal dispositions. ‘He or she is bad tempered,
careless, lazy’ etc.

ACTORS VS. OBSERVERS

Nisbett, Caputo, Legant, & Marecek (1973): Male participants
asked:
–“Why did you choose your major?”
–“Why did your friend choose his major?”
Actors: “Why did I choose engineering in particular ?”
Observers: “Why did my friend choose this major?”

proportion of all reasons

Nisbett, Caputo, Legant, & Marecek (1973)

e.g., “My friend
wants to make lots
of money.”

reasons
associated
with
reasons
associated
with

e.g., “Engineering is a
high-paying field.”

Social Influence
Conformity – is a type of social influence involving a change in belief or
behavior in order to fit in with a group. Two types:
• Internalization - changing your real thoughts and feelings as a result of
less direct pressure from others
• Compliance – agreeing with other people’s opinions and complying with
their request publicly but not changing your real internal opinions.

Obedience - a form of social influence where an individual acts in response
to a direct order from another individual, who is usually an authority figure. It
is assumed that without such an order the person would not have acted in
this way.

Conformity 1

Sherif’s (1935)
Autokinetic Effect Experiment

Autokinetic effect – when in total darkness we perceive a
small stationary bright light as moving.
How much did the light move when viewed by
themselves and then in groups of 2 or 3.ambiguous
task.

Conformity 2

Asch’s (1950s)Lines Experiments

• Control group – 35/37 people judged the correct line –
unambiguous task
• Experimental group – judgements out loud
All but one were confederates (1 + 6)
The confederates had been prearranged to all give an incorrect
answer to the tests.
• 37% of experimental group gave incorrect response
• Subjects showed extreme discomfort
• Fear of social disapproval
• https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NyDDyT1lDhA

Factors that affect conformity
– Group size:
• Conformity increases as group size increases
– Presence of a dissenter:
• One person disagreeing with the others greatly reduces
group conformity
– Culture:
• Greater in collectivistic cultures

Explanations of Conformity
Informational influence – to go with information derived from
others, rather than from ourselves, because it removes ambiguity in
the situation (desire to be correct) – Sherif’s study
Normative influence – The influence of other people that leads us
to conform in order to be liked and accepted by them; results in
public compliance with the group’s beliefs and behaviors, but not
necessarily in private acceptance – Asch’s study

Informational vs. NormativeSocial Influence
• Informational Social Influence
– Situation is ambiguous
– Participant relies on others for information
– Public response = private acceptance (internalization*)
• Sherif’s study

• Normative Social Influence
– Situation is not ambiguous
– Participant is looking for social approval
– Public response ≠ private acceptance (compliance*)
• Asch’s study

Obedience

Obedience to Authority

• Milgram’s shock generator studies
• The participant and a confederate (an actor pretending to be
another participant) are told by the experimenter that they will be
participating in an experiment to test “the effects of punishment
on learning behaviour”.
• Learner or teacher
• Teacher gives, learner receives electric shock

Milgram’s (1974) Obedience Experiment

The teacher believes that he is actually giving
shocks to the learner participant. In reality, there
are NO shocks being given to the learner.

Milgram’s (1974) Obedience Experiment

• After a certain number of level increases, the actor starts to bang
on the wall that separates him from the teacher. After banging on
the wall and complaining of his heart condition, the learner gives
no further response to the questions and no further complaints.
• It is at this point that many people begin to indicate their desire to
stop the experiment and check on the subject but they are told by
the experimenter to continue – and they do!

Milgram’s (1974) Obedience Experiment

• Before the experiment Milgram asked to fellow psychologists –
only sadists would give the maximum voltage.
• However, 65% (26 out of 40) of experimental participants
administered the experiment's final 450-volt shock, though many
were quite uncomfortable in doing so. No participant stopped
before the 300-volt level (average 360-volt).

Milgram’s (1974) Obedience Experiment

Shock Level
(Volts)

Number
of participants

%

300

5

12.5

315

4

10.0

330

2

5.0

345

1

2.5

360

1

2.5

375

1

2.5

450

26

65.0

…
Less artificial studies:
• Hofling et al (1966) - nurses were asked to give potentially lethal
injections to patients, and in spite of official guidelines forbidding
administration in such circumstances, 21 out of 22 appeared
prepared to do it.

• The study had high levels of ecological validity, due to the fact it was conducted in a real
life environment.

• Sheridan and King (1972) - people were asked to give real (but
small) electric shocks to a puppy (for a learning task). The
participants obeyed even though they could see the distress of the
animal.

• Zimbardo’s Standford Prison experiment (1973) - . The
SPE demonstrates aspects of conformity, obedience, and,
most significantly, the power of social situations on
people’s behaviour.
• Guards quickly became authoritarian, enforcing harsh
rules and humiliating prisoners (e.g., stripping, delousing,
sleep deprivation). Prisoners showed passive submission,
anxiety, and rebellion. The 2-week plan ended after 6
days due to ethical concerns over escalating abuse and
emotional breakdowns.

Lecture summary

• Attribution theories and errors/biases.
• Asch and Sheriff studies; internalization and compliance;
informational and normative social influence
• Milgram’s obedience study
• Zimbardo’s prison experiment.

